# Föreläsning 1

## Compiling
To compile, and run use:

    g++ -c hello.cc
    g++ -o hello hello.c
    ./hello

- g++ is the GNU C++ compiler

- clang++ is another compiler

- if **-o** is omitted, the compiler generates an executable named *a.out*

- to generate warnings about problematic constructs, one can use `g++ -Wall` (<https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Warning-Options.html>). `Wextra` is anothe one that might be useful.

## Parameters on the command line

    int main(int argc, char* argv[]) { ... }

- **argc** is the number of parametrs, including the program name. **argv** is an array of C-style strings that contains the parametrs.

## Reading and writing
- **cin** and **cout** are input and output streams (stdin and stdout)

- **>>** is the input operator, reads whitespace-separeted tokens. Returns *false* on end-of-file.

- **<<** is the output operator.

## Class Definiton
    class Point {
    public:
        Point(double ix, double iy);    // constructor, same name as class
        double getX() const;            // const - does not modify the state of the object
        double getY() const;            
        void move(double dx, double dy);    // does modify, not const
    private:
        double x;                       // attributes
        double y;
    };                                  // note semicolon

- methods are called member functions in C++, attribuets are called member variables

- member functions are only declared here. The definitions are in a separate file

- *public* and *private* "sections". Arbitrary order, *private* is default. 

- one can use *struct* instead of *class*. The difference is that *public* is default instead of *private*.

### Definition of member functions
The functions body is in a seperate file. Can be in the same file, but should mostly be used if the functions are used often and short.

    Point::Point(double ix, double iy) {
        x = ix; // this is ok but there are better ways to
        y = iy; // initialize member variables, see next slide
    }
    double Point::getX() const {
        return x;
    }
    double Point::getY() const {
        return y;
    }
    void Point::move(double dx, double dy) {
        x += dx;
        y += dy; }

## Allocation of Objects
In C++ objects can be allocated in several different ways.

- stack allocated (automatic) - local variables, accessed by name

    - `Point p1(1, 2);`

- heap allocated - like in Java, accessed though pointer

    - `Point* p = new Point(1, 2);`
    `double xLoc = p->getX();`
    `...`
    `delete p;`

    - **Point \*p** means that p is a pointer. **p->** is used to access members in the object. The lifetime of a heap-allocated object is between **new** and **delete**. If you forget to delete an object, the result is a *memory leak*.


# Notes from book
Chapter 1

## File suffix
Different compilers uses different suffix conventions. The most common are:

- .cc

- .cxx

- .cpp

- .cp

- .C

## Input output
To use output and input we need to tell the compiler that we want to use the `iostream` library. This is done with: `#include <iostream>`
Typically we put all `#include` at the beginning of the source file.

- **cin** (see-in) handles input, referred to as the standard input

- **cout** (see-out) handles output, referred to as standard output

- **cerr** (see-err) handles warning and error messages, referred as the standard error

- **clog** (see-log) handels general information about the execution of the program

Example:
```c++
std::cout << "Enter two numbers: " << std::endl;
int v1 = 0, v2 = 0;
std::cin >> v1 >> v2;
``` 
The example above uses **std::cout** and **std::endl** to indicate that the names cout and endl are defined inside the **namespace** named std.
Namespaces allow us to avoid inadvertent collisions between the names we define and uses of those same names inside a library. All the names defined by the standard library are in the **std** namespace. 

One drawback of this is that when we want to use something from the standard library, we must explicitly say that we want to use it from the **std** namespace. Writing `std::cout` uses the scope operator (**::**) to say that we want to use the name *cout* that is defined in the namespace **std**.

## Comments
Comments can be single line and paired. A single line is started with double dash `//` and ends with a newline.
A paired comment uses two delimiters `/*` and `*/`. Example:

```c++
    // this is a single line comment
    /*
     this comment can span
     multiple lines
     */
```

## Classes
We use headers to access classes defined for our own application. Header files usually have a suffix of **.h** but some programmers use .H, .hpp, or .hxx.
The standard library headers typicaly have no suffix at all. Compilers usually don't care about the form of header file names, but IDEs sometimes do. Moreower headers from the standard library are enclosed in angle brackets (< >). Those that are not part of the library (such as our own header files) are enclosed in double quotes (" ").








