---
title: Föreläsning 11
date:  17-03-2016
subtitle: 'Lecturer: Roger'
---

# Föreläsning 11

## Containers

### Different Kind of Containers
A container is an object that stores other objects and has methods for accessing the elements. There are two fundamentally different kinds of containers.

- **Sequences**: Elements are arranged in linear order. The sequences are `vector`, `list` and `deque`. New in C++11 are `array` and `forward_list`. the library class `string` supports most sequence features (for example it has iterators), but it is usually not used as a container.

- **Associative Containers**: Elements are arranged in an order defined by the container. The associative containers are `set`, `multiset`, `map` and `multimap` (implemented using search trees). New in C++11 are `unordered_` versions of these containers (implemented using hash tables).

### Container Notes
- Every container type has associated iterator types and functions that return iterators.

### Operations on Containers
Operations that are defined for all containers:

- `X()` - creates an empty container

- `begin()` - iterator pointing to the first element.

- `end()` - iterator pointing one past the last element

- `size()` - number of elements

- `empty()` - true if `size() == 0` (evaluated in constant time)

For almost all containers:

- `insert(p, t)` - insert `t` before `p` (not for `array` and `forward_array`)

- `clear()` - remove all elements (not for `array`)

## Fixed-Size Arrays
C++11 introduced a library class `array`, which is a wrapper around a built-in array. It has iterators like a `vector` and operations for element access.

```
array<int, 10> v; // the size is part of the type, elements
// are undefined (like a built-in array)
fill(v.begin(), v.end(), 0);
...
int i = find_if(v.begin(), v.end(), [](int x) { return x != 0; })
- v.begin();
```
Keep in mind that `arrays` are sequences but fixed in size. There are no "dynamic" operations like `push_back`, `pop_back`, `clear`, ...

## Singly-Linked List
C++11 introduced a library class `forward_list`, which is a singly-linked list. The operations reflect that the list is singly linked (only forward iterators, `push_front`, but no `push_back`, `insert_after`, but no `insert`, ...)

Use a `forward_list` only if you need a linked list and memory is very tight.

## Sequence
In addition to the common container operations, sequences have the following operations:

- `X(n)` - create a container with `n` default-constructed elements

- `X(n,t)` - create a container with `n` copies of `t`

- `front()` - a reference to the first element

- `back()` - a reference to the last element

- `push_back(t)` - append a copy of `t`

- `pop_back()` - remove (but don't return) the last element

- `erase(p)` - remove the element pointed to by `p`

- `resize(n)` - resize the sequence to size `n`, inserting default-constructed elements at the end or erasing elements at the end.

### Sequence notes
The reasongs that there are different kinds of sequences is efficiency considerations:


- `vectors` - insertion and deletion at the end is fast, allows random access (has `operator[]` and random access iterators)

- `deque` - insertion and deletion at the end and at the front is fast, allows random access

- `list` - insertion and deletion anywhere is fast, but you have no random access to elements and you pay a storage overhead since each list node has pointers to the next and previous node.

Use a `vector` unless you have very special reasons to use one of the other sequences. Bjarne Stroustrup has demonstrated that a vector nearly
always wins over a list, even in applications where elements are inserted
and removed in the middle.

### Vector
- A vector grows dynamically to accommodate new elements

- A vector has a size (the number of elements currently in the vector) and a capacity ( the maximum size to which the vector can grow before new storage must be allocated).

- A vector capacity can be increased (storage can be pre-allocated) with a call to `reserve(n)`

```

vector<int> v; // this works well
for (size_t i = 0; i != 1000000; ++i) { v.push_back(i); }

vector<int> v;
v.reserve(1000000); // but this might be more efficient
for (size_t i = 0; i != 1000000; ++i) { v.push_back(i); }
```

## Associative Containers
An associative container contains elements that are identified by a key.

- A map stores key/value pairs, a set stores only the keys.

- A multimap and a multiset allow multiple elements with the same key.

- There are two versions of each class: one "ordered" (implemented using a search tree), one "unordered" (implemented using a hash table). Both versions have the same interface.

- The key type in an ordered container must support the `<` operator (used for sorting).

- The must be a hash function fo the key type in an unordered container. The standard types have hash functinos.

- The unordered containers are new in C++11.

### Creating maps and sets
To create a map, you must specify the type of the key and of the corresponding value. To create a set, you must specify the key type.

```cpp
map<string, int> days_in_month; // key = month name, 
                                // value = days in month

set<string> used_emails;    // key = e-mail address

unordered_map<string, string> phonebook;  // key = name,
                                          // value = phone number
```
### Elements in maps
The elements (key/value pairs) in maps are objects of the library class `pair`. The pair's components are stored in the public member `first` and `second`. Examples:

```cpp
pair<int, double> p1; // both components value-initialized
pair<int, double> p2(1, 2.5);
...
cout << p2.first << "," << p2.second << endl;

```

The map `insert` operation takes a `pair` as parameter. It is convenient to create the pair on the fly:

```cpp
map<string, int> daysInMonth;
days_in_month.insert(pair<string, int>("January", 31));
days_in_month.insert(make_pair("February", 28));
days_in_month.insert({"March", 31}); // new in C++11
```

### operator[] with Maps
For a map `m`, `m[key]` returns a reference to the associated value if the key exists in the map. Otherwise, it inserts the key and a default-constructed value and returns a reference to it.

Only use `[]` if you really want the insertion to take place if the key doesn't exist.

### Use map-Specific Functions, Not Library Algorithms
`map::find` uses a tree search with logarithmic time complexity to find an element in a map. `unordererd_map::find` uses a constant-time hash search. If you used the library `find` algorith, the search time would bi linear.


## Associative Containers Operations

In addition to the common container operations, associative containers have the following operations:

- `insert(t)` - insert a copy of `t` and return an iterator pointing to the new element. For a unique container, the return value is a pair with the iterator as the first component and a bool indicating success or failure as the second component.

- `find(k)` - return an iterator pointing to the element with key `k`, or `end()`

- `count(k)` - return the number of elements with key `k`

- `equal_range(k)` - return a range containing all elements with key `k`, as a pair `p` of iterators. The range is `[p.first, p.second)`.

- `erase(k)` - destroy and remove all elements with the key `k`, return the number of erased elements

- `erase(p)` - destroy and remove the element pointed to by `p`.


