# Föreläsning 2

Började med att repetera pointers från föreläsning 1.

Overhead om man använder *safe pointers*. Men kan ibland vara värt det.

## Don't Use Dynamic Memory
Often Java programmers comes to C++ and creates variables the same way as in Java. This is often unnecessary.

It's only necessary to allocate an object on the heap (with new) if:

- the objects should be shared

- if the size of the object is unknown

- if the object must outlive the current scope.

## Destructor
Is usefull if we use pointers in our class. Without delete on the pointers we have a memory leak.

**Destructor** is defined with `~`, e. g:

```cpp
    ~Line();
    ...
    Line::~Line() {
        delete start;
        delete end;
    }
```

The destructor is called automatically when the object is destroyed and is responsible for cleaning up after the project.

### Safe Pointers
If we use safe pointers, the compilator will create a default destructor for us, and we don't need to create a destructor.

## Inheritance
Similar to Java, but member functions are not by default polymorphic. You must specify this with the keyword `virtual`.
In C++, we can inherit from more than one class.

- **non-virtual**: the type of the *pointer* determines which function is called

- **virtual**: the type of the *object* determines which function is called

```cpp
class A {
public:
    void f();
    virtual void g();
};

class B : public A {
public:
    void f();
    virtual void g() override;
};
```

It's not mandatory to write `override`, but it's recommended for readability.

### Why non-virtual?
Virtual functions causes an override, so if we don't need it we don't want it in our code.

## Namespaces
Used to revent naming-collisions.

Don't write `using namespace`` in a header file!. A file that includes the header file may not be prepared for this.

You can define your own, `graphics.h`.

```cpp
namespace Graphics {
    class Point { ... };
    class Line { ... };
}
```
In another file:

```cpp
#include "graphics.h"

int main() {
    Graphics::Point p(1, 2);
    ...
}
```

### Using names from namespaces
There are several ways to access names from namespaces.

- **Explicit naming:**

```cpp
Graphics::Point p(1, 2);
```

- using **declarations**

```cpp
using Graphics::Point;  
Point p(1, 2);
```

- using **directives**

```cpp
using namespace Graphics;
Point p(1, 2);
```

## Operator Overloading
In c++ we can overload the + operator. We can't do that in Java.

```cpp
class Complex {
public:
    Complex(double re, double im);
    Complex operator+(const Complex& c) const;
private:
    double re;
    double im;
};

Complex Complex::operator+(const Complex& c) const {
    return Complex(re + c.re, im + c.im);
}
```

Should be used with caution. Might be confusing if you add some types of object. In the example above, adding two complex numbers make sence, but what about adding two Car object? What should the result be? Might be confusing and doing more harm than good to overload these kind of operators on some objects.


## Header files
- Do not use `using namespace` in header files.

- Use a "guard", to avoid including more than once (`STACK_H` can be any "name"):

```cpp
#ifndef STACK_H         // guard
...
#endif
``` 

- User created header files are included with ", e.g: `#include "stack.h"`.

## Primitive Data Types
- sizes are implementation defined. (In Java the sizes are of a standard size.)

- the operator `sizeof` gives the size of an object or a type in character units: ` sizeof(char)) == 1` always, `sizeof(int) == 4` typically.

- integral types and characters may be signed or unsigned. Implementation defined if a plain char is signed or unsigned.

## Variables and constants
Rules for declaration of variables are as in java.
The compiler isn't required to check the use of unitialized variables.

**Constant values**: `const int NBR_CARDS = 52;`

**Global variables**: Variables may be defined outside of functions and classes; then they become globally accessible. Use with great care.

# Book notes
Reading assignment: 2.1-2.4, 3.1, 12.1.2, 12.1.5.


## Primitive Built-in types
The size of (number of bits in) each arithmetic types varies across machines. The standard guarantees minimum sizes.

## Which type to use?
Deciding which types to use can be difficult. Here are some rules of thumb (p. 34):

- Use an `unsigned type` when you know that the result can't be negative.

- Use `int` for integer arithmetic. `short` is usually to small and in practice `long` often have the same size as `int`. If your data values are larger than the minimum guaranteed size of an `int`, then use `long long`. 

- do not use plain `char` or `bool` in arithmetic expressions. Use them *only* to hold characters or truth values. Computations using `chars` are especially problematic because `char` is `signed` on some machines and `unsigned` on others. If you need a tiny integer, explicitly specify either `signed char` or `unsigned char`.

- use `double` for floating-point computations. `float` usually does not have enough precision, and the cost of double-precision calculations versus single-precision is negligible. In fact, on some machines, double-precision operations are faster than single. The precison offered by `long double` usually is unnecessary and often entails considerable run-time cost.

- don't mix `unsigned` values and `signed` values. It is essential to remember that `signed` values are automatically converted to `unsigned` when an expression is made. Therefore mixing `unsigned` and `signed` values can yield surprising results.

## Strings and chars
A character enclosed within single quotes is a `char`.
Zero or more characters enclosed in double quotation marks is a string:

```cpp
'a'             // character literal
"Hello World!"  // string literal
```

A string is an **array** of constant `chars`. The compiler appends a null character (`'\0'`) to every string literal. Thus, the actual size of a string literal is one more than its apparent size.
For example, `'A'` represents a single character `A`, wheras the string literal `"A"` represents an array of two characters, the letter `A` and the *null character*.

## Initialization vs assignment
In C++ *initialization* and *assignment* is not the same thing, even though the distinction often doesn't matter. 

> **Initialization** is not **assignment**. Initialization happens when a variable is given a value when it is created. Assignment obliterates an object's current value and replaces that value with a new one.

> **TIP**: Initialize every object of built-in type. It is not always necessary, but it is easier and safer to provide an initializer until you can be certain it is safe to omit the initializer. An uninitialized variable has an indeterminate value. Using the value of an uninitialized variable is an error that is hard to debug, so always initialize.

## Declaration vs defining
C++ supports *separate compilation* that lets us split our program into several files. To support separate compilation, C++ distinguishes between declaration and definition.

A **declaration** makes the name known to the program. A **definition** creates the associated entity. 

- A variable **declaration** specifies the type and name of the variable. If we don't want to define a variable and only declare it, we add the `extern` keyword.

- A variable **definition** is a declaration. In addition to specifying the name and type, a definition also allocates storage and may provide the variable with an initial value.

```
extern int i;       // declares but does not define i
int j;              // declares and defines j
```
If we provide an initial value to a varible with the keyword `extern` we override `extern` and the variable will be defined.

A variable need to be **defined** exactly once but can be **declared** many times.

## Naming convention
Naming conventions are most useful when followed consistently.

- An identifier should give some indication of its meaning.

- Variable names normally are lowercase - `index` not `Index` or `INDEX`.

- Like `Sales_item`, classes we define usually begin with an uppercase letter.

- Identifiers with multiple words should visually distinguish each word, for example, `student_loan` or `studentLoan`, not `studentloan`.

## Scopes
```cpp
int main() 
{
    int sum = 0;
    ...
}
```

`main` is defined outside the curly braces, and therefore has **global scope**. Global scope means that the variable are accessible throughout the program.
`sum` is defined inside the curly braces and have **block scope**.

> **Tip**: Define variables where you first use them. Doing so improves readability by making it easy to find the definition of the variable. More importantly, it is often easier to give the variable a useful initial value when the variable is defined close to where it is first used.

## References
A **reference** defines an alternative name for an object. A reference type "refers to" another type. We define a reference by writing a declarator of the form `&d`, where `d` is the name being declared.

```cpp
int ival = 1024;
int &refVal = ival;     // refVal refers to (is another name for) ival
int &refVal2;           // error: a reference must be initialized
```

A reference is not an object. Instead, a reference is just another name for an already existing object.

After a reference has been defined, all operations on that reference are actually operations on the object to which the reference is bound.

When we reference to a reference, we are assigning to the object to which the reference is bound. When we fetch the value of a reference, we are really fetching the value of the object to which the reference is bound. 

## Pointers
A pointer is a *compound* type that "points to" another type. Like references, pointers are used for indirect access to other objects. Unlike a reference, a pointer is an object in its own right. Pointers can be assigned and copied; a single pointer can point to several different objects over its lifetime. Unlike a reference, a pointer need not be initialized at the time it is defined. Like other built-in-types, pointers defined at block scope have undefined value if they are not initialized.

> **Compound type** is a type that is defined in terms of another type.

We define pointers by writing a declaration of the form `*d`, where `d` is the name being defined.

```cpp
int *ip1, ip2;          // both ip1 and ip2 are pointers to int
double dp, *dp2;        // dp2 is a pointer to double; dp is a double
```

It is an error to copy or otherwise try to access the value of an invalid pointer. As when we use an uninitialized variable, this error is one that the compiler is unlikely to detect. The result of accessing an invalid pointer is undefined. Therefore, we must always know whether a given pointer is valid.

### The address of an Object
A pointer holds the address of another object. We get the address of an object by using the address-of operater, the `&` **operator**.

```cpp
int ival = 42;
int *p = &ival;     // p holds th eaddress of ival - p is a pointer to ival
```

### Using a Pointer to Access an Object
When a pointer points to an object, we can use the **dereference** operator (`*`) to access that object:

```cpp
int ival = 42;
int *p = &ival;     // p holds the address of ival - p is a pointer to ival
cout << *p;         // * yields the object to which p points to - prints 42
```

Dereferencing a pointer yields the object to which the pointer points. We can assign to that object by assingning to the result of the dereference:

```cpp
*p = 0;     // * yields the object - we assingn a new value to ival through p
cout << *p; // prints 0
```

When we assign to `*p`, we are assigning to the object to which `p` points to.

### Null pointer
A **null pointer** does not point to any object. Code can check whether a pointer is null before attempting to use it. There are several ways to obtain a null pointer:

```cpp
int *p1 = nullptr;          // equivalent to int *p1 = 0;
int *p2 = 0;                // directly initializes p2 from the literal constant 0

// must #include cstdlib
int *p3 = NULL;             // equivalent to int *p3 = 0;
```

The most direct approach is to initialize the pointer using the literal **nullptr** (C++11).

### Pointer Advice
Uninitialized pointers are a common source of run-time errors.
As with any other uninitialized variable, what happens when we use an unitialized pointer is undefined. Using an uninitialized pointer almost always results in a run-time crash. However, debugging the resulting crashes can be surprisingly hard.

Under most compilers, when we use an uninitialized pointer, the bits in the memory in which to pointer resides are used as an address. Using an uninitialized pointer is a request to access a supposed object at that supposed location. There is no way to distinguish a valid address from a invalid one formed from the bits that happen to be in the memory in which the pointer was allocated.

Our recommendation to initialize all variables is particularly important for pointers. If possible, define a pointer only after the object to which it should point has been defined. If there is no object to bind to a pointer, then initialize the pointer to `nullptr` or zero. That way, the program can detect that the pointer does not point to an object.

### Assignment and Pointers
It can be hard to keep straight wheter an assignment changes the pointer or the object to which the pointer points. The important thing to keep in mind is that assignment changes its left-hand operand. If we have a pointer `pi` (`int *pi = 0`) and want to assign a new value to `pi` we write:

```cpp
pi = &ival;     // value in pi is changed - pi now points to ival
```
This changes the address that pi holds.

If we want to change the value of the object that `pi` points to, we write:

```cpp
*pi = 0;        // value in ival is changed - pi is unchanged
```

## Namespace using Declarations
To read from standard input, we have used `std::cin`. This is using the scope operator (`::`) which tells the compiler to look in the scope of the left-hand operator for the name in the right hand operator. Thus, `std::cin` says that we want to use the name `cin` from the namespace `std`.

By using declarations, we can use **declarations**. By using a `using` declaration we can use a name from a namespace without qualifying the name with a `namespace_name::` prefix. A using declaration look like the following:

```cpp
using namespace::name;
```

Once the `using` declaration has been made, we can use the `name` directly.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

using std::cin;

int main() {
    int i;
    cin >> i;           // cin is a synonym for std::cin
    cout << i;          // ERROR: no using declarations for cout.
    std::cout << i;     // ok
    
    return 0;
}

```
### Using is Required for each name
If we want we can declare more than one name for a namespace:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

using std::cin;
using std::cout; using std::endl;

int main() {
    cout << "Hello!" << endl;
    int i = 0;
    cin >> i;
    ...
}
```
By declararing the names with `using` we can use the *names* without the prefix (in this case `std`).
Note that it must be a `using` declaration for each name we use, and each declaration must end with a semicolon.


### Header Should Not Include using Declarations
code inside headers should not use `using` declarations. The reason is that the contents of a header are copied into the including program´s text. if a header has a `using` declaration, then every program that includes that header gets the same `using` declaration. As a result, a pragram that didn't intend to use the specified library name might encounter unexpected name conflicts.

### Using namespace std
Some programmers declare the entire std library, `using namespace std;`. This is bad practice. If you declare `using namespace std` you might incorrectly call a function or declare a variable that exists in `std`. `std` namespace has tons of identifiers, many of which are very common one (`list`, `sort`, `string`, `iterator`, etc). 

Mostly it just something to get used to, and it makes the code more readable for human readers and by the compiler.

Src: <http://stackoverflow.com/questions/1452721/why-is-using-namespace-std-considered-bad-practice>.


## Heap vs. Stack
Main source: <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wlJJgjdgvYE>.

### Heap
- Large pool of operating system memory
- Used in dynamic memory allocation
- The `new` keyword in C++ and `malloc` in C allocate memory on the heap.
- Slower to allocate variables on the heap than on the stack
- No guaranteed efficient use of memory. The programmer is in charge of delete unused objects (unless using safe pointers).

### Stack
- Allocating memory on the stack is fast
- No need to deallocate memory
- Each process gets its own stack (assume single-threaded processes)
- LIFO - last in first out
- Limited space (OS dependent) 

Each stack consists of **stack frames**.
Each stack frame contains the *parameters* to a function, its *local variables* and the data necessary to recover the *previous* stack frame.


Because the stack is relatively small, it is generally not a good idea to do anything that eats up lots of stack space. 

Each stack consists of **stack frames**.
Each stack frame contains the *parameters* to a function, its *local variables* and the data necessary to recover the *previous* stack frame.

### Creating on stack and heap

* **stack**: `int myArray[10];`

* **heap**: `int* myArray = new int[10];`

#### Allocate on the stack
When allocated on the stack, the object is automatically destroyed when the function is exited. 

```cpp
void f() {
    Point p1(1, 2);
    cout << p1.getX() << endl;
}
```

#### Allocate on the heap with safe pointer
Allocating on the heap on a safe pointer means that the object is destroyed when the safe pointer goes out of scope (when the function exits).

```cpp
void g() {
    unique_ptr<Point> p(new Point(1, 2));
    cout << p->getX() << endl;
}
```

#### Allocate on the heap with raw pointer
With a raw pointer, the object must be deleted before the function exits. If the object isn't deleted, there is a memory leak. 

```cpp
void h() {
    Point *p = new Point(1, 2);
    cout << p1->getX() << endl;
    delete p;
}
```

When we are deleting a pointer, it is a good idea to set the pointer to a null pointer. If we don't - we might use a *dangling pointer*. A dangling pointer are pointers that point to deallocated memory. That will lead to *undefined behavior*.

```cpp
delete p;
p = nullptr;    // use p = 0 if not using C++11
```

#### Failing new operator
src: <http://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/69-dynamic-memory-allocation-with-new-and-delete/>

If the new operator fails, a `bad_alloc` exception is thrown. This should be handled.

There is a way (instead of using exception handling) to tell the operating system to return a null pointer if the memory can't be allocated. This is done by adding the constant `std::nothrow` between the `new` keyword and the allocation type:

```cpp
int *p = new (std::nothrow) int; //p is null if allocation fails
```

After we have allocated a pointer, we can check if the allocation succeded or not:

```cpp
int *p = new (std::nothrow) int;
if (!p) {   // handle case where new returned null
    std::cout << "Could not allocate memory!";
    exit(1);
}
```

This is a **common** thing to forget, since asking for new memory rarely fails (atleast not in a development environment). 

Deleting a null pointer have no effect, so there is no reason to not set the pointer to `nullptr` (or 0) after deallocating the memory. I.e. it's safe to `delete p` if `p` is a nullptr, and there is no need to check if the pointer is null or not.




