---
title: Föreläsning 3
date:  25-01-2016
subtitle: 'Lecturer: Roger Henriksson'
---

# Föreläsning 3


## Auto Type Specifier
New, from C++11.

The `auto` keyword tells the compiler to deduce the type from the initializer.
Don't use `auto` when the type is obvious:

```cpp
auto sum = 0;       // silly, sum is int
```

## Strings
As in Java, `string` is a standard class. Unlike Java, strings are modifiable (similar to Java's string builders/string buffers).

To use strings, ``include <string>``.

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

int main() {
    std::cout << "Type your name ";
    std::string name;
    std::cin >> name;
    std::cout << "Hello, " + name " << std::endl;
}
```

- Overloaded operators, `` <<, >>, +, <, <= ``

- Operations such as: ``s.size()``, ``s.substr(start, nbr)`` and many more.

- Can access chars with ``s[index]``.

### Looping through a string

```cpp
string s = ...;
for (string::size_type i = 0; i != s.size(); ++i) {
    cout << s[i] << endl;
    s[i] = ’ ’;
}
```
In the new standard C++11 introduced a new way to loop through strings:

```cpp
for (auto& c : s) {
    cout << c << endl;
    c = ’ ’;
}
```

## For loops
For statments in Java and C++:

```java
for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) { ... }        // Java
```

```cpp
for (int i = 0; i != 10; ++i) { ... }       // C++
```
Differences:

- In testing for end of range with ``!=`` is preferred instead of ``<``.

- The pre-increment ``++i`` is preferred instead of post-increment ``i++``. Pre-increment is more efficient than post-increment, but modern compilators may optimize this automatically.

## Vectors
The class ``vector`` is a template class. Similar to Java's ``ArrayList``.

To use vectors, ``#include <vector>``.

Access data in vectors with ``v[index]``.

### Vector notes
- A vector is initially empty. Add element at the end with ``push_back``.

- Storage for new elements are allocated automatically.

- Element acces with ``v[index]``. No runtime check on the index.

- Vectors may be copied: ``v1 = v2``. 

- Vectors may be compared ``v1 == v2``. So if we have two vectors that contains strings, ``==`` compares the *"content"* of each vectors.

## Array
> Bjarne Stroustrup: “The C array concept is broken and beyond repair.”

# Book Notes
Reading assignment: 2.5, 3.2-3.5


## Dealing with types

### Type Aliases
A **type alias** is a name that is a synonym for another type. Typealiases lets us simplify complicated type definations, making those types easier to use. Type aliases also let us emphasize the purpose for which a type is used.

We can define a type alias in one of two ways. Traditionally, we use **typedef**.

```cpp
typedef double wages;       // wages is a synonym for double
typedef wages base, *p;     // base is a synonym for double, p for double*
```

C++11 introduced a second way to define a type alias, via an **alias declaration**:

```cpp
using SI = Sales_item;      // SI is a synonym for Sales_item
```

### The auto Type Specifier
It is not uncommen to want to store the value of an expression in a variable. To declare the variable, we have to know the type of that expression. When we write a program, it can be surprisingly difficult - and sometimes even impossible - to determine the type of an expression. Under the new standard, we can let the compiler figure out the type for us by using the **auto** type specifier. 

### The decltype Type Specifier
Sometimes we want to define a variable with a type that the compiler deduces from an expression but do not want to use that expression to initialize the variable. For such cases, the new standard introduced a second type specifier, **decltype**, which returns the type of its operand. The compiler analyzez the expression to determine its type but does not evaluate the expression:

```cpp
decltype(f()) sum = x;      // sum has whatever type f returns
```

Above, the compiler doesn't call `f` but it uses the type that such a call would return as the type for `sum`. That is, the compiler gives `sum` the same type as the type that would be returned if we were to call `f`.

## Library string Type
To use the `string` type, we must include the string header, `#include <string>`.

### Initialize a string
A class may define many different ways to initialize objects of its type.
Below are some examples of common ways to initialize strings:

```cpp
string s1;              // default initialization, s1 is an empty string
string s2 = s1;         // s2 is a copy of s1
string s3 = "hiya";     // s3 is a copy of the string literal "hiya"
string s4(10, 'c');     // s4 is cccccccccc
```

### Common string operations
- `getline(is, s)` - reads a line of input from is into s. Returns `is`.
- `s.empty()` - returns `true` if s is empty. Otherwise returns `false`.
- `s.size()` - returns the number of characters in `s`.
- `s[n]` - returns a reference to the `char` at position `n` in `s`. Positions starts at 0.
- `s1 == s2` - checks if string `s1` and `s2` are equal (contains the same characters)

### Reading string
#### Ignore whitespace
To read until end-of-file use:
```cpp
int main() {
    string word;
    while (cin >> word)
        cout << word << endl;
    return 0;
}
```

#### With newline
If we don't want to ignore whitespace we can use `getline` instead of `>>`:

```cpp
int main() {
    string line;
    // read input a line at a time until end-of-file
    while (getline(cin, line))
        cout << line << endl;
    return 0;
}
```

### Process Every Character
When processing every character, a good way is to use the range-based for-loop that was introduced in C++11. The syntax is:

```cpp
for (declaration : expression)
    statement
```

- *expression* is the object of a type that represents a sequence, e.g. a `string`.
- *declaration* defines the variable we will use to access the element in the sequence. A tip is to use `auto`.

**Example**:

```cpp
string str("some string");

// print the characters in str one character to a line
for ( auto c : str)     // for every char in str
    cout << c << endl;  // print the current character followed by a newline
```

#### Change characters in for loop
If we want to change the value of a characters in a `string`, we must define the loop variable as a reference type. 

> **Reference**: a reference is just another name for a given object. When we use a refence as our control variable, that variable is bound to each element in the sequence in turn. Using the reference, we can change the character to whch the reference is bound.

**Example**:
```cpp
string s("Hello World!!");

// convert s to uppercase
for (auto &c : s)       // for every char in s (note: c is a reference)
    c = toupper(c);     // c is a reference, so the assignment changes the char in s

cout << s << endl;
```
The output of the above would be: `HELLO WORLD!!`.


### String functions
Here is a list of some common string functions:

- `isalnum(c)` - `true` if `c` is a letter or a digit
- `isapla(c)` - `true` if `c` is a letter
- `isdigit(c)` - `true` if `c` is a digit
- `islower(c)` - `true` if `c` is a lowercase letter
- `isspace(c)` - `true` if `c` is a whitespace (i.e., a space, tab, vertical tab, return, newline or formfeed)
- `isupper(c)` - `true` if `c` is an uppercase letter
- `tolower(c)` - if `c` is an uppercase letter, returns its lowercase equivalent; otherwise returns `c` unchanged
- `toupper(c)` - if `c` is a lowercase letter, returns its uppercase equivalent; otherwise returns `c`unchanged

## Library vector Type
A `vector` is a collection of objects, all of which have the same type. Every object in the collection has an associated index, which gives access to that object.
To use a vector, me must include the appropriate header.

```cpp
#include <vector>
using std::vector;
``` 

A `vector` is a **class template**. A template are not functions or classes. They can be thought of as instructions to the compiler for generating classes or functions. The process that the compiler uses to create classes or functions from templates is called **instantation**.

### Ways to initialize a vector
Using C++11 we can *list initialize*.

```cpp
vector<string> articles = { "a", "an", "the" };
```

We can also initialize a vector from a count and an elemen value.

```cpp
vector<int> ivec(10, -1);         // ten int elements, each initialized to -1
vector<string> svec(10, "hi!");   // ten strings, each element is "hi"
```

We can also copy elements into another vector

```cpp
vector<T> v1;       // vector that holds object of type T. v1 is empty
vector<T> v2(v1);   // v2 has a copy of each element in v1
vector<t> v2 = v1   // equivalent to v2(v1), v2 is a copy of the elements in v1
```

We can also create a vector with specified size.

```cpp
vector<int> v1(10);   // v1 has ten elements with value 0
```

### Adding alements
We can use the `push_back()` operation to insert a value at the end of the vector.

```cpp
vector<int> v1;
v1.push_back(5);    // append 5 to vector
```

Because `vectors` grows efficientrly, it is often unnecessary - and can result in poorer performance - to define a `vector` of a specific size. 
Starting with an empty vector and adding elements at run time is distictly different from how we use built-in arrays in C and in most other languages. In particular, if you are accustomed to using C or Java, you might expect that it would be best to define the `vector` at its expected size. In fact, the contrary is usually the case.

### Looping through a vector
We can loop through a vector using a for-loop.
Note that **the body of a range for must not change the size of the sequence over which it is iterating**.

To assign new values to the element in a vector, we need a reference.

```cpp
vector<int> v{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6};
for (auto &i : v)
  i *= i;
```

### Equality
The equality operator and the relational operators have the same behavior as the corresponding string operations. Two `vectors` are equal if they have the same number of elements and if the corresponding elements all have the same value.

### Some vector operations
- `v.empty()` - returns `true` if `v` is empty; otherwise returns `true`
- `v.size()` - returns the number of elements in v.
- `v.push_back(t)` - adds an element with value `t` to the end of `v` 
- `v[n]` - returns a reference to the element at position `n` in `v` 

**Caution**! It is an error to subscript an element that doesn't exist, but it is an error that the compiler is unlikely to detect. Instead, the value we get at run time is undefined. Attempting to subscript elements that do not exists is, unfortunately, an extremely common and pernicious programming error. So-called *buffer overflow* errors are the result of subscripting elements that do't exist. **Such bugs are the most common cause of security problems in PC and other applications**.


## Iterators
All library containers have iterator, but only a few of them supports the subscript (`[]`) operator.

Unlike pointers, we do not use the address-of operator to obtain an iterator. Instead, types that have iterators have members that return iterators. In particular, these types have members named `begin` and `end`. The `begin` member returns an iterator that denotes the first element (or first character) if there is one.

```cpp
auto b = v.begin(), e = v.end();    // b and e have the same type
```

The iterator returned by `end` is an iterator positioned "one past the end" of the associated container. It is often referred to as the **off-the-end iterator** or abbreviated as "the `end` iterator".

If the container is empty, the iterators returned by `begin` and `end` are equal - they are both off-the-end iterators.

### Iterator Operations 

We can compare two valid iterators using `==` or `!=`. Iterators are equal if they denote the same element or if they are both off-the-end iterators for the same contianer.

As with pointers, we can dereference an iterator to obtain the element denoted by an iterator. Also, like pointers, we may dereference only a valid iterator that denotes an element. Dereferencing an invalid iterator or an off-the-end iterator has undefined behavior.

As an example, we'll write a program that capitalizes the first character of a string using an iterator.

```cpp
string s("some string");
if (s.begin() != s.end()) { // make sure s is not empty
  auto it = s.begin();      // it denotes the first character in s
  *it = toupper(*it);       // make that character uppercase
}
```

### Moving iterators
We can use the increment (`++`) operator to move from one element to the next.

### The begin and end operations
The type returned from `begin` and `end` depends on whether the object on which they operate is `const`. If the object is `const`, then `begin` and `end` return a `const_iterator`; if the object is not const, they return `iterator`.

```cpp
vector<int> v;
const vector<int> cv;
auto it1 = v.begin();   // it1 has type vector<int>::iterator
auto it2 = cv.begin();  // it2 has type vector<int>::const_iterator
```

It is usually best to use a `const` type (such as `const_iterator`) when we need to read but do not need to write to an object. To let us ask specifically for the `const_iterator` type, the new standard introduced two new functinos named `cbegin` and `cend`.

```cpp
auto it3 = v.cbegin();    // it3 has type vector<int>::const_iterator
```

## Key concept
Programmers comming to C++ from C or Java might be surprised that we used `!=` rather than `<` in our `for` loops. C++ programmers use `!=` as a matter of habit. They do so for the same reason that they use iterators rather than subscrips: This coding style applies equally well to various kind of containers provided by the library.

Not all library types have the subscript (`[]`) operator. Similary, all of the library containers have iterators that define the `==` and `!=` operators. Most of those iterators do not have the `<` operator. By routinely using iterators and `!=`, we don't have to worry about the precise type of container we're processing.


