---
title: Föreläsning 5
date:  01-02-2016
subtitle: 'Lecturer: Roger Henriksson'
---

# Föreläsning 5

## Function Declarations
Everything, also functions, must be declared before use. You may write the declaration separate from the definition of a function. The declaration consists of the return type, function name, and parameter list (the parameters need not be named). This information is called the prototype of the function.

## Default Arguments
Formal parameters may be given default values. If the corresponding argument is omitted, it is given the default value. Only trailing parameters may be given default values.

```cpp
void move(int from, int to = 0, int by = 1)
move(2, 3); // equivalent to move(2, 3, 1)
move(2);    // equivalent to move(2, 0, 1)
```
## Classes

### Class Basics
```cpp
class Point {
    public:
        using coord_t = unsigned int;
        Point(coord_t ix, coord_t iy);
        coord_t get_x() const;
        coord_t get_y() const;
        void move_to(coord_t new_x, coord_t new_y);
    private:
        coord_t x;
        coord_t y; };
```

- The accessor functions do not change the state of the object. They shall be declared const.

- Note the public type alias: we want users to use that name.

### Member Functinos
```cpp
Point::Point(coord_t ix, coord_t iy) : x(ix), y(iy) {}

Point::coord_t Point::get_x() const { return x; }

Point::coord_t Point::get_y() const { return y; }

void Point::move_to(coord_t new_x, coord_t new_y) {
    x = new_x;
    y = new_y; }
```
 - Short member functions like these are often defined inside the class, not only declared. Such functions are automatically inline.

### Some Class Notes
- `this` is a pointer to the current object, as in Java

- A struct is the same as a class but all members are public by default. Structs are often used for internal implementation classes.

- If two classes reference each other, you need a class *declaration*:

```cpp
class B; // class declaration, "forward declaration"
class A {
    B* pb;
};
class B {
    A* pa;
};

```

### Friends
Java's package visibility gives all classes in a package extended access rights.
In C++ we can hand out access right to a specific class or to a specific 
(member or global) function. It is also more coarse grained, you hand out the 
right to access *all* member of a class. This is done with a `friend` 
declaration.

Friend declarations may be placed anywhere in the class definition. They are 
not part of the class interface (not members).

```cpp
class List {
  // the function insert may access private members of List
  friend ListElement::insert(const List&);
};

class ListElement {
  // all member of List may access members of ListElement 
  friend class List;
};

```

### Mutable Data Members
If we wish to modify a member variable from a `const` function, we must 
declare the member as `mutable`.

```cpp
mutable vector<unsigned int> values;
```

### Initializing Constructor
We can initialize a constructor in two ways.

```cpp
class A {
  ...
  private:
    int x = 123;

};

A::A(int ix) : x(ix) {} // preferred way

A::A(int ix) { x = ix; }  // assignment
```

Note that members that are references or const cannot be assigned - they must 
use initialization.

### Static Members
Const and static is somewhat missunderstood. `const` is used to indicate that 
a variables value cannot be changed. The keyword `static` has multiple uses. 

More specifically, `static` can be used in three contexts.

1. Inside a function

2. Inside a class definition

3. Infront of a global variable inside a file making up a multifile program.

#### Inside A Function
`static` inside a function means that once the variable has been initialized, 
it remains in memory until the end of the program. For instance, we can use 
a static variable to count hov many times a function has been called:

```cpp
function a() {
  ...
  static int count = 0;
  count++;
}
```

Because `count` is a `static` variable, `static int count = 0` will only be 
executed once. `static` prevents re-initialization of he variable. 
Whenever the function `a()` is called, the value of count will increase. 

#### Inside a Class Definition
##### Member Variable
A `static` **member variable** has the same value in any instances of the class 
and doesn't even require an instance of the class to exist.

It's good code style to refer to static member functions through the use 
of a class name (`class_name::x` instead of `instance_of_class::x`). Doing so 
helps to remind the programmer that the static member variables do not belong 
to a single instance of the class and that you don't need to have a single 
instance of a class to use a static member variable.

To access a static member, you use the scope operator, `::`.

You can't initialize a static class member inside of a class. Infact, you can't 
initialize a static variable inside a header file; do it in a `.cpp` file 
instead. Moreover, you must initialize the static class member or it will 
not be in scope. We must also use the type of the static variable when we set 
it (such as `int user::next_id = 0`).

##### Member Functions
We can also have `static` **member functions** in a class. Static member 
functions are functions that do not require an instance of the class, and are 
called the same way you access static member variables. **Static member 
functions can only operate on static members of the class**, as they don't 
belong to a specific instance of a class. 

#### Infront of a Global Variable
The last use of `static` is a global variable inside a file of code. In this 
case the use of `static` indicates that the source code in other files that are 
part of the project cannot access the variable. Only code inside the single 
file can see the variable (It's scope -- or visibility -- is limited to the 
file). This use of `static` is **a relic from C**. 



- A static member must be defined outside the class.

## Don't Use Raw Pointers
If we really want to use dynamic memory **we should use a safe pointer instead**
. Class `unique_ptr` has a destructor which deletes the object that the pointer 
is pointing to.

## Sharing Objects
If we want to share a common resource among objects, then it's valid to use 
pointers. The we should use a safe pointer that counts how many pointers that 
point to the object, and only deletes the object when the numbers reaches 
zero. `shared_ptr<type>` is such a pointer.



