---
title: Föreläsning 6
date:  04-02-2016
subtitle: 'Lecturer: Roger Henriksson'
---

# Föreläsning 6

## new and delete
`new` and `delete` are translated into calls that allocate/deallocate raw memory.

## Semantics

### Reference Semantics
In Java, all objects are manipulated via reference variables (pointers in C++ 
). This is called *reference semantics*, and it's often the preferred way to 
manipulated objects.

```cpp
string* s1 = new string("asdfg");
string* s2 = s1; // two pointers to the same object
s1->erase(0, 1); // erase the first character of s1
cout << *s1 << endl; // prints sdfg
cout << *s2 << endl; // also prints sdfg, maybe unexpectedly since you haven't
                     // touched s2

```

### Value Semantics
Reference semantics is not always what you want. In C++ you may copy objects, 
not only pointers, to get the desired results. This is called *value semantics*.

```cpp
string s1 = "asdfg";
string s2 = s1;     // copy the object
s1.erase(0, 1);     // only s1 is modified
```

### Reference or Value Semantic
Value semantic is preferred for **small** objcets (numbers, strings, dates, 
colors, ...). When object **identitiy** is important, reference sementic 
is better.

## Initialization and Assignment

The following statement are handled by different C++ language construcs::

```cpp
Person p1("Bob");
Person p3 = p1;     // initialization

Person p4("Alice");
p4 = p1;            // assignment

```

- **Initialization**: A new uninitialized object is initialized with a copy 
of another object. This is handled by the *copy constructor* of the class, 
`Classname(const Classname&)`. It also handles value parameters and function 
value return.

- **Assignment**: An existing object is overwritten with a copy of another 
object. This is handled by the *assignment operator* of the class, 
`Classname& operator=(const Classname&)`.

### Synthesized Copy Function
We can implement the copy constructor and the assignment operator to get the 
desired copy behavior. You should **not** write your own copy constructor 
or assigment orperator in a class that doesn't use dynamic resources. The 
compiler will do a good job instead.

### Preventing Copying
In C++, we can prevent classes from being copied by using `delete`.

```cpp
class Person {
  public:
      ...
      Person(const Person&) = delete;
      Person& operator=(const Person&) = delete;
  private:
    ...
};
```

