---
title: Föreläsning 7
date:  17-03-2016
subtitle: 'Lecturer: Roger Henriksson'
---

# Föreläsning 7

## Vectors of Objects
You should almost always use **vectors** instead of arrays. 

We can choose to store objects or pointers to the object on our vector.

If we use objects, our class must have a copy (and/or move) constructor.
Also, large objects can be slow to copy.

If we use pointers, only pointers are copied, so no copy constructor is 
needed. 
But we must **delete** all objects before the vector goes out of scope.

If we use `unique_ptr` we don't have to worry about deletion.
But with `unique_ptr` we cannot copy, only move. But we can also use 
shared pointers.

## Overloading

### Rules for Overloading
- All operators can be overloaded except `::` (scope resolution), 
`.` (member selection), `.*` (member selection through pointer to member), `? :` (ternary operator) and `sizeof`.

- It is not possible to invent a new operator symbols or change the 
priority between operators.

- At least one of the operands of an overloaded operator must be an object (**not** a pointer to an object). So you cannot redefine the meaning of operators for built-in types, e.g. `int + int`.

### Operator Functions
Each usage of an overloaded operator is translated into a call of an 
*operator function*. 
Operator functions are "normal" functions with "strange names" like 
`operator=`, `operator+`, ...

Operator functions may be members or nonmembers. Rules:

- Assigment (`=`), subscript (`[]`), call (`()`) and member access arrow (`->`) must be members.

- Operators that change the state of their object should be members: `+=, ++, `...

- Operators that don't change the state of any object should be nonmembers, `+, *, ==`, ...




