---
title: Föreläsning 9
date:  17-03-2016
subtitle: 'Lecturer: Roger'
---

# Föreläsning 9

## Multiple Inheritance
The relationship "is-a" can hold between a class and more than one other class. A teaching assistant is a student and a teacher, an amphibious vehicle is a land vehicle and a water vehicle... In C++, a class may be derived from several base classes:

```
class TeachingAssistant : public Student, public Teacher {
   ...
};
```

Think carefully before you use multiple inheritance. There are problems with data dupliation that must be considered. Multiple inheritance of interfaces (classes with only pure virtual functions) doesn't give any problems.

If there are any name conflicts (such as same function names), these must be explicitly resolved (use `::`).

```
ta1.Student::print();
ta2.Teacher::print();
```

## Containers, Algorithms & Iterators
The standard library (also called the **standard template library, STL**) provides these components:

- **Containers** for homogenous collection of values (vectors, deques, lists, sets, maps, stacks, queues, priority queues).

- **Algorithms** for operating on containers (searching, sorting, copying,...)

- **Iterators** for iterating over containers

One important design goal for  the library was efficiency. Since everything builds on templates, there is no execution-time penalty for using the library.

### Iterators
With iterators you can:

- set an iterator to the start of a container

- access the value that an iterator "points to"

- increment the iterator to point to the next value

- check if the iterator has reached the end of a container

#### Getting Iteratros From Containers
Each library container has two functions, `begin()` and `end()`. `begin()` returns an iterator to the first element of the container. `end()` returns an iterator one past the last element.

Each library container class container defines two iterator types:

- `iterator` allows reading and writing

- `const_iterator` only allows reading

`const` iterators are returned from const objects, non-const iterators for non-const obects. C++11 introduced `cbegin()` and `cend()` that returns the `const` iterator.


